
Machine translation is everywhere: you get it for free on Facebook, Word, other Microsoft services, and possibly, most known - Google Translate. If you use MT services, some work best for your language: Baidu in China, DeepL in Europe, or Yandex in Russia.


MT works well: you may easily get an output document with all titles, images, and footnotes perfectly in place. The document also reads smoothly and makes a lot of sense.

…Or does it?

Machine Translation AD 2022 can model language well. The MT output will likely be fluent and understandable for a source text written correctly and in fairly standard language. The biggest risk is that the recipient loses sense and meaning. Text can get distorted, negated, or changed to something irrelevant because of MT. It can also be embarrassing.

The MT from German to English quoted above demonstrates that DeepL can use an idiom, but it cannot know that the whole text is non-translatable (needs to be localized or transcreated). Let’s look at more examples from the legal domain of Polish to English.

Polish to English – distorted meaning

<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->
Source: Przeprowadzenie testu proporcjonalności naruszenia prawa własności przez sąd nie może zostać oderwane od prawidłowych ustaleń faktycznych dokonanych w rzetelnym postępowaniu, w którym strona może brać aktywny udział i korzystać ze wszystkich uprawnień procesowych wynikających z prawa do obrony.

Machine translation: Conducting the proportionality test of a court’s infringement of a property right cannot be divorced from the correct findings of fact made in a fair proceeding in which a party can actively participate and exercise all procedural rights under the right of defence.

Source text is about the proportionality test conducted by the court, and the test pertains to some infringement of a property right.
Translated text is about the proportionality test conducted due to a court’s infringement of a property right.
Not the same thing! Would you immediately know that anything is wrong if you only had the machine translation available?
<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->

This is the worst case of MT errors:

* the machine-translated text makes sense;
* there is nothing suspicious, at least not at first glance;
* the sense of the translation is not what the source means.

<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->
Polish to English – wrong key term
Source: Where relationship and respect are emphasized in personal education classes (as they are in Holland), the rate of unprotected sex in teens is low, the age of first intercourse is higher, and fewer teens report that their first sexual experience resulted from coercion.

Machine translation: Tam, gdzie na lekcjach wychowania fizycznego kładzie się nacisk na relacje i szacunek (tak jak w Holandii), wskaźnik uprawiania seksu bez zabezpieczenia wśród nastolatków jest niski, wiek pierwszego stosunku wyższy, a mniejsza liczba nastolatków przyznaje, że ich pierwsze doświadczenie seksualne było wynikiem przymusu.
<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->

The source text is about personal education classes.
The translated text is about physical education classes.

This is almost as bad as the previous case – almost because it’s only one wrong term:

The translated text makes sense, even without understanding any English, the Polish text can make you wonder how physical education might impact sex life of teens. Without reading the source, it’s hard to figure out what class was actually in question, so machine translation is hardly usable.
Polish to English – just embarrassing
<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->
Source: Zakład Postępowania Administracyjnego i Sądowoadministracyjnego

Machine Translation: Plant of Administrative and Administrative Judicial Procedure
<!-- Przytoczone przykłady nie mogą zostac zmienione-->

Source text is about a Department of Administrative and Judicial-Administrative Proceedings.
Translated text made it into a plant.

This mistake is rather obvious and easy to detect even without reading into English text. In a legal text, you expect a “department” rather than a “plant” (and Polish word “zakład” may mean either of them, depending on the context). However, such an omission can be very embarrassing if the machine-translated text reaches its audience without a human touch.

Now let’s rephrase the subject of this article: What are the risks of using machine translation if no one verifies its correctness against the source text?

The biggest risk is misleading your target audience. If a proper understanding of the text is critical in the sense of human life, health, political decisions, or large financial gain/loss, then the meaning must stay the same. The more mission-critical the text, the more necessary becomes the professional validation of MT against the source text. This must happen before the translation reaches its target audience.
The second big risk is damage to your reputation. Meaningful content should always be approved by profesional, who has access to, and understands the source text. If ,machine-translated text has unintended obscene meaning, or involuntary joke caused by translating person/company name, it should never be realeased without a check.


You can use unverified machine translation (rather) safely, for example, in these areas:

Non-critical content like chats, user comments to a webpage, low-value goods descriptions in online shops or press news with limited impact. In each of these use cases, before publishing raw MT, you need to assess the risk of misleading or offensive translation. (Does any client refrains from buying a nicely priced shirt online, even if the description is a bit off, like in the picture provided?)
Gisting – getting an overall sense of content (e.g., patents, legal or audit documentation) to decide which parts should be translated or professionally post-edited, or what to translate first. In this use case, the risk is minimal because raw MT is never to be published without thorough human validation.
